[Issue #9982] Document DLQ messages redrive for workflow management (#11242)
HHS/simpler-grants-gov: documentation/api/workflow-management-dead-letter-queue-redrive.md

Users can check messages in DLQ for further analysis, identify the issue, and make decision for redrive or delete.

## When do messages go to the DLQ?
- Retryable errors
    - **UnexpectedStateError** - Workflow in unexpected state
        - Missing target state in transition
    - **ImplementationMissingError** - Missing configuration/implementation
        - Missing entity type configuration
        - Missing approval config
- General/unexpected errors<br>
    Any exception not caught as `RetryableWorkflowError` or `NonRetryableWorkflowError`:
    - Database timeouts
    - Network issues
    - Unexpected Python exceptions
- Validation errors

## Investigating DLQ Messages

Before taking action on DLQ messages, investigate the root cause:

### What to check:

1. Message content in AWS Console
- Go to AWS Console → SQS → `local-workflow-queue-dlq` (or your environment's DLQ)
- Click "Send and receive messages" → "Poll for messages"
- Review message body for:
  - Missing required fields (e.g. `event_id`, `acting_user_id`)
  - Invalid `workflow_id` or `event_type`

>   - Malformed JSON structure

Reviewer: I'd move this down / some of this is information that our logging would tell you so you shouldn't need to read the message directly to get the info in most cases.

Move this to a later step, logs in New Relic should be the first one always.

Author: Updated.
Simplified and moved to a new created "Other checks"

2. Workflow service logs
- `"Failed to validate SQS message as WorkflowEvent"` - Validation errors
- `"Encountered retryable workflow error"` - Retryable errors (UnexpectedStateError, ImplementationMissingError)
- `"Encountered non-retryable workflow error"` - Non-retryable errors (these don't go to DLQ)
- `"Workflow event handler exceeded timeout"` - Processing timeouts
- `"Unexpected error processing workflow event"` - General exceptions

3. Workflow data in database
- Check workflow state and history:
  ```sql
  -- Find workflow by ID from the message
  SELECT * FROM workflow WHERE id = '<workflow_id>';
  
  -- Check workflow event history
  SELECT * FROM workflow_event_history 
  WHERE workflow_id = '<workflow_id>' 
  ORDER BY created_at DESC;
  
  -- Check if workflow is in unexpected state
  SELECT id, current_state, entity_type 
  FROM workflow 
  WHERE id = '<workflow_id>';

>   ```

Reviewer: I'd leave anything with the DB queries out of the debugging. Maybe reference the tables we might check, but this would be a last resort only if there was some fundamental issue in our logging, should be less prominent.

Author: Content is simplified with table names and moved to "Other check"

4. Related entity data, depending on `entity_type`
  - **Opportunity**: Check `opportunity` table
  - **Award Recommendation**: Check `award_recommendation` table

>   - Verify the entity still exists and is in a valid state

Reviewer: I'd just cut this. Whoever is debugging should be aware of the entities and if these would only be relevant for specific workflows where the amount of context about them would probably warrant their own workflow-specific runbooks that we won't cover here.

Author: Updated.

5. Application monitoring and logs

>   - Check New Relic for additional context and error details, on either API or workflow dashboard

Reviewer: This should always be step #1 for any sort of debugging. It's also effectively the same as what you have as #2. Our application logs are in New Relic, there's no separation there.

Author: Updated.
Moved up the New Relic as Primary check, and combined with #2.

## DLQ message redrive
**Critical**: Always resolve the underlying issue before redriving messages, otherwise they will fail again and return to the DLQ after 3 more attempts.

### Steps
1. Confirm the DLQ message availability, then click the "Start DLQ redrive" button on top-right corner.
![DLQ redrive step 1](images/DLQ-redrive-1.png)

2. Make selection for "Message destination" and "Velocity control settings", then click "DLQ redrive" to proceed. It may take a few seconds for the message to move out.
![DLQ redrive step 2](images/DLQ-redrive-2.png)

### What happens after redrive:
- Messages are moved back to the main queue (`local-workflow-queue`)
- Workflow service picks them up automatically (polls every 10 seconds by default)
- If processing succeeds → messages are deleted and you'll see success message from the log
- If processing fails again → messages return to DLQ after 3 more attempts

### Verifying the fix worked:
1. Check workflow service logs for successful processing
2. Query database to verify workflow state changed:
   ```sql
   SELECT id, current_state, updated_at 
   FROM workflow 
   WHERE id = '<workflow_id>';
   ```

> 3. Confirm DLQ is empty (or only expected messages remain)

Reviewer: Querying the DB is a last resort, the logs tell us what state transitions happen, don't query the DB to find info that is easily available on our dashboards.

```suggestion
### Verifying the fix worked:
1. Check workflow service logs for successful processing
2. Confirm DLQ is empty (or only expected messages remain)
```

Author: Updated.

# Dead Letter Queue Redrive and Management

## Overview
This guide explains how to manage messages in the Dead Letter Queue (DLQ), including understanding why messages end up in the DLQ, when to redrive vs delete, and step-by-step procedures for both operations.

> **Note**: An AWS account is required for all DLQ operations (check, redrive, and delete).

Reviewer: I would rephrase this to say "access to the AWS account of the environment you want to run this in is required". We aren't writing generic documentation for how DLQs work, we're writing for our system.

Author: Updated

## What is a Dead Letter Queue?
A Dead Letter Queue (DLQ) is a special SQS queue that receives messages that cannot be successfully processed after multiple attempts. It prevents problematic messages from blocking the processing of valid messages.

## When do messages go to the DLQ?
Messages move to the DLQ after exceeding the **maximum receive count** (default: 3 attempts) without being successfully deleted. This happens with:
- Retryable errors (database timeouts, network issues)
- General/unexpected errors
- Processing timeouts

> - Validation errors (malformed messages)

Reviewer: We don't need to fully document how Amazon SQS works, a brief summary and link to official docs is fine, we're not rewriting AWS' docs, we're adding our system-specific details and a runbook.

If we want to talk about why messages go to a dead letter queue, we should talk about real scenarios that are possible in our system, not speak in generalities. For example, a validation error is almost certainly something that would not go to a DLQ for us as we'd consider it junk.

Author: will update the document to be more product specific
@chouinar want to double check the behavior of the validation errors/malformed message, as I used a message which is missing "event_id" and "acting_user_id" for the real DLQ test
Are we supposed to fix malformed message or discard directly?
<img width="2822" height="1400" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/d1cc9642-104c-4edd-a963-9a1f75a57640" />

<img width="2596" height="1309" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/16264b39-d48f-4eac-a984-c3fb6ed175cc" />

<img width="1190" height="1157" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/eb8986c9-f3d7-4788-a019-1adfaf4df417" />

## Investigating DLQ Messages

Before taking action on DLQ messages, investigate the root cause:

### What to check:
- **Message content** - Is it partially missing or malformed?
- **Workflow data** - Check related workflow status, entity state

> - **System logs** - Look for errors, timeouts, or infrastructure issues

Reviewer: We wouldn't want to link to New Relic, but we should at least mention that you can find this in New Relic on either our API, or workflow dashboard.

Author: Updated
